Hello and welcome to your very first
tutorial on R programming. This is
Kirill Eremenko and I am super excited
to have you here, and today we're talking
about the data types in R. Now we are
going to cover five main data types
which are also called the atomic data
types in R. So let's get started right
away,
ok I've got my window, R studio window
open here and at the top on the left,
this is where we're going to write our
code. So if you don't see this windows so
over this part of the window here in the
top left for instance it looks like this
you only see the console and these other
two windows then all we have to do is
click this button up in the top left
corner to create a new R script. So
let's go ahead and do that and now we
have this new R script where we
will be writing our code.
Alright so let's start with the integer
datatype so I'm going to put a hashtag
and hashtagging R stands for comment and
why that is is because I want to type in
something that doesn't that shouldn't
affect the code and execution of the
code. Now I'm going to go into my
settings here and I'm using a Mac here
but if you're using Windows then
everything should be quite similar and
we've already done the layout of our
code but what I want to do is I just want to
increase the font size, so we can see
everything a bit better on the recording.
So there we go, so I want to create an
integer. I'm going to start by giving the
variable name, the name is going to be X
and then I'm going to put triangle
bracket facing towards X so kind of
like a less than sign and then a minus.
So this creates an arrow, there we go
that's the arrow that we've created with
these two symbols and in R, this is
the assignment operator and I want to
assign X the value of two so it will be
an integer of tube but in R and we'll
get to this in a second
in order to make sure that this is going
to be an integer we have to put a
capital L afterwards. Once again, we'll
get back to that in a second let's just
run
this code for now. So in order to run
this code, all you have to do is keep
your cursor or keep this line
selected basically you see this vertical
align a blinking that means I'm on this
current line and press control enter if
you are on a windows or command return on
a mac and as you can see what happened
is this code has been copied into the
console and has been executed and what
we have now is a new variable in the
global environment over here, so X and
the value is 2L and now we're going to
check what actual type does X have and
in order to check the type all you
have to do is type in type of and then
in brackets put in the value that you
want to check. So let's execute that, so
once again I'm going to click command
return on my mac and here this code
now has been copied to the console and
now we can see that it is an integer.
Alright so we've created our first
integer, once again we'll get back to
this L in a second. Alright let's have
a look at the next type which is the a
double type and double just basically
means anything with a decimal point, so
we're going to say double here so this
is going to be our comment. So basically
anything with a hashtag at the start is
completely ignored. I know we're
executing line-by-line but still if you
want to save your file later and you
don't want to get any warnings and then
you should put hashtag before anything
that shouldn't be looked at all the
isn't part of your code.
Alright so now we're going to create a
double variable, so let's call it y and
then we'll put once again the assignment
operator and we'll give it a value of
2.5, so it has a decimal point and once
again let's execute this line, first
command return on the mac and there you
go we've got this code was copied here
and has been executed as you can see and
right away we've got a new variable here
with a new value and now let's have a
look at the type of Y. Type of Y,
alright so let's execute this line now.
As you can see, it has been copied over
here and executing that line what the
council return wasn't double. So now we
have two variables, one is an integer and
one is a double.
Ok so now we can discuss this L symbol,
so why do we have to put an L? Why can't
we just say X arrow 2. Well the reason
is because by default R will decide
for you how it should store the data and
all operations in R, all the medic
operations are always conducted on a
double level because it makes sense
right if you're going to add like a
double variable so something that
has decimal points and something that
doesn't have decimal point then the result
of the operation might actually have
decimal point so it's logical that any
operations are conducted with numbers
that have decimal points so that's why
it's better for R to store anything as
double. So if you don't put an L here, so
let's go here, let's delete that and
let's rerun this line so we will
basically override our existing variable
X over here. So I'm going to press command
return and now this variable has been
created again and it is just X is just
2 not a 2L anymore. Now if we check type
of X, you'll see that it's a double so
basically R by default will store your
integer variable, this single X variable
as a double. Just because it is
anticipating that you will require
arithmetic operations in the future so
and because they're going to be run in
double mode. Anyway, it's just easier for
R to store that variable like that
right away. So if you know for instance
that you're not going to be running
arithmetic operations and for example
this variable is just used as a category
or as you're giving sequences to
something like like the first, second,
third, you're never going to be adding
them or you're never going to be
creating, running of arithmetic
operations and then you can just put an
L here and that will tell R that it is
definitely an integer and you want to
store as an integer. Alright we've done
two, we've got three more to go.
Ok so what's the next one, the next one
is complex. We won't be stopping on
complex
for too long but because it is a data
type in R, I thought it's worth
mentioning mentioning so let's say 2, 3
plus 2I, so if you've done math like a
bit sophisticated math then you'll know
what complex numbers are. If you don't,
don't really worry about it. We won't be
dealing with them. I'm just going to show
you how they work here so zed is a
complex number. It's 3+2I and if you want
to check type of zed, you'll see that it
is indeed complex. Alright, once again we
won't be stopping that for too long
so let's move on to the remaining two.
The remaining two are character that's
number one and let's create a character. So
we're going to call this variable, I'm
going to make some space here and we're
going to call this variable A and inside
A we want to put some text or let's say
we want to put a letter. When I put the
letter H, so to put a letter in to
variable, you need to put quotation marks
and as you could see so I'm going to
really redo that again as you can see as
soon as I press the single quo..
the double quotations symbol
once R conveniently, R studio
conveniently creates a second one for me
so I don't have to, I won't forget to
close my quotation marks and then I can
put a letter inside here. As you can see
it's been highlighted in a different
color and now I can check type of A,
right? So what you'll see if I just run
type of A right now, I'll get an error.
Type of A, object A not found and that's
because I haven't created this variable
yet here so you can't even see it here
because I forgot to run this line and
that is because R will only execute
the lines that you tell it to run. So
first, let's run this line and now we can
check type of A, as you can see it is a
character.
Alright, so that's how you basically
store any kind of letters, texts and so
on and finally we're coming a two of the
last data type that we'll be looking at and that
is logical.
So in order to create a logical variable,
let's first give it a name, let's say it'll be
Q. That'll be the name of all variable
by the way, you don't have to limit
yourself at just one letter for the
variable so let's say it will be Q1 for
instance and here we'll assign it a
value of true. So logical variables are
basically either true or false and here
we're going to assign value of true and
for true we'll just use the letter T
and now we'll type type of Q1. First, we'll
run this line and as you can see now we
have variable here true and now we'll
run this line as you can see it's
logical.
By the way, there are other ways you can
create logical variable so for instance
you could say Q2 is not true so you can
do true or you can do F or you can type
in the whole world but it has to be in
caps so Q2 is false and now we'll be
tired of typing type of Q2. Check
that as well it's also logical so that's
how you create illogical variables.
Alright so that brings us to the end of
this tutorial.
Hope you enjoyed it. Have a play around
with that. Try experimenting, creating
your own couple of variables just to
make sure you understand how the
different types work and I look forward
to seeing an next time. Until then, happy
coding.